---
title: "Exploring Economics: The purpose of economics"
date: 2024-03-10
draft: false
toc:
  enable: false
  auto: false
linkToMarkdown: false
share:
      enable : true
      Twitter : true
      HackerNews : true
      Reddit : true
      Whatsapp : true
      Facebook: False
      Line : false
      Weibo : false
---
Shortly after I finished High school I had decided to take 1 year to focus entirely on my entrepreneurial journey before university. I was lucky to be participating in a really good french incubator program led by two great economists in Mexico in the heart of Mexico City. My interactions with them made me ask myself if I wanted to follow the engineering or the economics path. 

I clearly choosed the engineering path after evaluating how my  strengths and situation at that time could optimize to generate the most impact in my goals. Now the scope of my goals has grown and thus the knowledge that I need to complete them too. 

Hopefully a  lot of the needed  knowledge seems to hold on to  “economics”, so I will be sharing part of my notes in this post series. With that said… leeeeets go!

## What is “economics”? 

Wikipedia gives us this perfect definition:
{{< admonition quote >}}
*«Economics focuses on the behavior and interactions of economic agents and how economies work»*
{{< /admonition >}}

Investopedia gives this definition:
{{< admonition quote >}}
*«Economics is a social science that focuses on the production, distribution, and consumption of goods and services»*
{{< /admonition >}}

The University of Buffalo says:
{{< admonition quote >}}
*«Economics is the study of scarcity and its implications for the use of resources, production of goods and services, growth of production and welfare over time, and a great variety of other complex issues of vital concern to society»*
{{< /admonition >}}

If we try to summarize previous definitions into one we could say:
{{< admonition quote >}}
*«Economics examines the behavior and interactions of economic agents, focusing on the production, distribution, and consumption of goods and services in the context of scarcity»*
{{< /admonition >}}

OK, notice these keywords from our previous definition are needed to have economics:

* “Economics agents”: Entities engaged in economic activity (buying, selling, production, distribution, consumption, resource management, influencing capital).
* "Scarcity": Denote the relative availability of production inputs or the decrease in the supply of a resource or product relative to demand over time.

Let's try a quick logical technique “Reductio ad absurdum” to analyze the importance of previous keywords: 

<ol type="A">
  <li> In a world without economic agents, and without scarcity:
    <ul>
      <li> Zero market dynamics occurs.</li>
      <li> Resources are abundant.</li>
      <li> Economics becomes irrelevant.</li>
    </ul>
  </li>
  <li> In a world without economic agents but scarcity:
    <ul>
      <li> Zero market dynamics occurs.</li>
      <li> Resources remain scarce but without economic agents, scarcity becomes a useless concept.</li>
      <li> Economics becomes irrelevant.</li>
    </ul>
  </li>
  <li> In a world with economics agents but without scarcity:
    <ul>
      <li> Economic agents have no constraints on resources.</li>
      <li> No need for allocation or distribution of resources since they are abundant.</li>
      <li> Economic agents have more freedom to divert their attention to other pursuits.</li>
    </ul>
  </li>
</ol>


Case “C” is interesting, it can help us to find markets with a potential disruption factor – by the centralization/decentralization of the power to accomplish the production/allocation of resources leading to the readjustment or emergence of new economic agents, leading to new interactions that will create new sub-markets from the parent one.

I believe current technological changes – Digitalization, Automation, AI – will lead us to a post-scarcity scenario in a lot of industries, destroying their economics agents and forcing the creation of new ones under a centralized/decentralized way… no matter if it is performed by humans or another “intelligent” agent.

We can see one example of this post-scarcity condition in the digital entertainment industry. Before digital streaming platforms and the internet, consumers faced limitations imposed by broadcasting companies and physical formats. They were confined to content available on broadcast schedules and CDs/DVDs in stores. However, the rise of digital entertainment through the internet has shattered these constraints – new economic agents have emerged and the old ones have been forced to reinvent themselves. We now see digital creators, digital influencers, advertisers and streaming platforms reshaping areas and processes like content production, consumption, and distribution enabling new interactions different to the previous ones generated by the old economics agents in the system.

## The Soul of economics

We have explained what economics does but not the “why?” The soul of economics is to explain how we manage to build a civilization that elevates us so far above the energy, consumption and knowledge levels of the base environment of the earth. It serves as the scaffolding upon which civilizations ascend beyond the confines of the natural world, guiding humanity towards the zenith of development paving a prosperous future. 

Now, being less poetic, it helps us to manage limited resources to meet unlimited needs. It guides us in creating systems that promote wealth creation and innovation while addressing societal challenges.